>> Brian Holt: Uncontrolled Forms,
not just from when you feel
out of control of your life.
We're gonna talk about
some uncontrolled forms.
Alluded to a little bit
on this Create Order page
that we have controlled inputs here,
right?
That we're actually, explicitly using
the value and we're setting it and
we're using hooks to track everything.
As you might imagine, that's called a
controlled form because we're using React
to explicitly control the input and
the output of the form.
I will say that this is more unusual.
I would say, usually, you wanna do
what's called an uncontrolled form,
which is basically, let the browser just
handle all of the form stuff for you, and
only listen for submit events.
This is pretty easy for
us to just kinda knock out really quick.
So let's go ahead and go do that.
Also, wanted to show you how to do a post
or a mutation with a TanStack Query.
So we'll knock out both of
those birds with one stone.
>> Brian Holt: Okay, so
inside of your API directory,
we're gonna make a getPastOrder,
no, I'm just kidding.
We're gonna make a postContact file here.
>> Brian Holt: And it's gonna be export
default async function postContact,
takes in name, email, and message.
And contact response, or
const response = await fetch,
and we're gonna post to /api/contact.
And we have to give it some
more configuration here, so
we have to give it a method,
which is going to be POST headers,
as we learned before,
definitely s headers.
We're doing Content-Type application/json,
and the body is going to
be JSON.stringify( name,
email, and message).
So if this is not apparent yet,
we're gonna make a contact form, right,
where someone can go in and
put name, email, and a message, and
then we will spam them with emails.
That's kind of my plan here
in Brian's Capitalism 101.
So if the response is not okay,
>> Brian Holt: Then
we'll just throw an error.
>> Brian Holt: This is how you wanna
handle this actually because that way,
TanStack Query will actually catch the
error for you, and then it'll set the is
error property be true, and then you
can handle that appropriately, right?
>> Brian Holt: And
then return response.json.
So this is an async function.
So it always returns a promise,
I think we talked about that earlier,
that async functions always return.
So what we could have
done here is it said,
>> Brian Holt: Const json = response.json,
and return json,
that's typically what I've done.
But I got this code from TanStack Query,
and they do it this way.
And it's because if you return a promise,
then it does something called promise
chaining, that none of you ever have to
think about that term ever again, but
that's what it is called,
where you basically do promise, then this.
And so if you return a promise,
it implicitly chains that
promise to the current promise.
Not that really matters for you, but
that's why it's okay that we're not
awaiting here, cuz you could do a to
return await response.json, but
you don't need to, and
it doesn't really make a difference.
>> Brian Holt: Again, stuff you just
don't really have to care about.
Okay, so let's go to index.lazy.jsx
>> Brian Holt: I
feel like most of the stuff I learned
from stuff like this is like,
I'll look at a lot of line of codes like,
why the hell does that work that way?
And then I'll get way too deep into it,
that's how I found that one.
Okay, index.lazy.jsx,
we're gonna make a contact form.
So we'll just make another one of
these li's with a link into it.
This is gonna go to contact, and
we're gonna put a contact us or
something like that.
>> Brian Holt: Okay, and
then we're gonna go make a new route here.
So this is gonna be contact.lazy.jsx.
Get a nice little stub
here from TanStack router.
>> Brian Holt: So
that's all good, we need import
useMutation from TanStack React Query,
and we need our postContact
from postContact.
There we go, and then we'll make
a function called ContactRoute,
or page, or whatever you wanna call it.
And we'll just put that up here.
>> Brian Holt: Okay,
now we have our React component, so
now we're gonna do a mutation, which
is just a fun way of saying, a post, or
a put, or a patch, or something like that,
but it's changing something.
A query is in theory, you can call
the query as many times as you want,
it doesn't change anything, right,
it's just getting data back from the API.
And a mutation, you don't wanna call that
a bunch of different times because it
could be semantically different depending
on if you do it multiple times, right?
I don't wanna get into the intricacies
of REST, because, again,
it is one of the dumbest things
that people argue about is,
should this be a put, or should this
be a patch, or should this be a post?
And my answer to that is,
it doesn't matter, just write the API,
right, who cares?
So TanStack kind of wraps all these
things into the put, patch, delete, all
that kinda stuff into a mutation, right,
something is changing on the server side.
So const mutation = useMutation,
here a mutation function,
function ee.preventDefault, right,
cuz we're gonna use this as a form submit.
So, we'll have a preventDefault.
We're gonna grab the form data.
So, we're gonna say that by
const formData = new FormData.
FormData is a browser API, so
this comes from the browser,
it doesn't come from React.
And we're gonna say e.target.
E.target in this particular case,
because this is gonna be
a submit event from a form.
E.target will be what?
The form, right?
So the form element will
actually be the e.target here.
So when you do new FormData like this,
it's going to then pull all this
out into this FormData object, and
we can now pull all of the information
out of the form using this FormData API.
Okay, and then we're
gonna return postContact,
formData.get("name").
And we're gonna do that three times,
once for email and once for message.
Just to make sure we got this right,
we're gonna look in postContact's name,
email,
message, get rid of that,
don't save, and to look,
again, in contact, name,
email, message, right?
We gotta make sure that the things
get put in there in the right order.
Now, we have this mutation function,
or hook that we can call.
I always call that a hook, but
it's like the result of a hook.
This would be an object of some variety,
what do they call it,
the UseMutationResult.
This is the name of the type, and
now this doesn't get called every
time like query does, right?
It actually waits for you to invoke it.
So let's go check out how you do that.
Let's go start building our markup for
the page.
We're gonna say, return here, and
we'll start building our contact page.
Ok, h2, this is a contact,
and then we're gonna say,
if the mutation is successful, so
if they successfully
click Submit my contact.
We don't wanna just leave
them on the contact page,
we wanna do something else, right?
So we're gonna say, isSuccess.
And if it is successful,
then we're gonna say, h3 submitted.
In theory, you would have probably
some nicer thing here, would be like,
redirect them back to the home page or
something like that,
but I don't know, let them do some work,
let them run it, okay?
So otherwise,
we're gonna show them the form, right,
of something that they can submit.
So the form, and
then we're gonna say onSubmit.
>> Brian Holt: We're gonna say,
mutation., you're never
gonna guess what the function's called,
mutate [LAUGH].
So whenever the Submit happens, right,
either by someone hitting Enter or
hitting the Submit button, it's going to
call this function, which as you guessed,
is probably gonna go call the mutation
function on this useMutation hook, right?
But not before then, which is cool.
All right, we're gonna put a couple
inputs in here, name = "name".
We're gonna have one for
placeholder="name",
and we'll have another one here for email.
And it's a good idea as well
to put type equals email,
that'll bring up the different keyboard
in iOS and Android, right, and
it'll also do some basic validation is,
is this a valid email, yeah.
>> Question 1: Why is it, for us calling
a mutation .mutate, why does that
automatically go to mutate.function and
not us calling mutate.mutate function?
>> Brian Holt: That's a good question.
So this is not actually directly
calling the useMutation function here.
It's actually calling something
else inside of TanStack Query,
which is doing a bunch of other stuff
first, and then it calls your function.
>> Question 1: Okay.
>> Brian Holt: Yeah, so
this is just saying, hey,
whenever you're ready, call this function.
This is the function that I've
made to actually call the API, but
there's some other machinery that
it has to take care of first.
That make sense?
Cool, good question.
Okay, so that's the inputs that we're on.
So email, email, email, the placeholder,
we should probably make these capital
because we're not savages, all right?
And then we'll have a text
area underneath this.
>> Brian Holt: Placeholder = message,
and name = message.
And that's good for that, and
then we just want a button at the end
that says, submit, button>Submit.
If you really wanna get explicit here,
you can say, type="submit",
but you don't need to,
that's implicit on buttons, right?
But whatever, that's up to you.
>> Brian Holt: And cool, all right, I
think this is pretty close to good to go.
Just refresh the page here.
We'll go to Padre Gino's, contact us,
nice looking little contact
form we've built out here.
So we're gonna put Brian,
we'll put brian@example.com.
And why do you have
snake-fish pizza?
>> Brian Holt: This is disturbing.
>> Brian Holt: This is
probably from the FBI.
So we should be able to submit this now,
submitted.
And if we go look at your,
you can see right there,
this is now being logged
in our API server.
And like all customer contact forms,
it just gets logged then ignored.
[LAUGH] But the point being here is, one,
we did the mutation with TanStack Query,
which is pretty cool.
And we also did uncontrolled forms, which
I'm gonna say, there's no reason that we
would need to necessarily keep track
of everything in a hook here, right,
cuz we're not doing anything
that's kind of reactive to that,
we're not doing any sort of type ahead,
or.
In the previous course,
I did one with pet adoption.
So you would set the cat to be the type of
animal, and then you'd have to repopulate
the breed list so it's reactive to
what's happening in the first drop-down,
also known as the double
drop-down problem.
That one,
you have to do a controlled form because
you have to react to the first one, right?
You have to repopulate the breed drop-down
list based on what's in the first
drop-down.
But this one, you're just gathering
all the form data and you're
submitting it somewhere, uncontrolled
form is how you wanna do that.